This is a LibriVox recording.
All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information or to find out how you can volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
The Picture of Dorian Gray by Oscar Wilde.
CHAPTER XI
He passed out of the room and began the ascent, Basil Hallward following close behind.
They walked softly, as men instinctively do at night. The lamp cast fantastic shadows on the wall
and staircase. A rising wind made some of the windows rattle. When they reached the top landing,
Dorian set the lamp down on the floor, and, taking out the key, turned it in the lock.
"'You insist on knowing, Basil?' he asked in a low voice.
"'Yes, I am delighted,' he murmured, smiling. Then he added, somewhat bitterly,
"'You are the one man in the world who is entitled to know everything about me. You have had more to
do with my life than you think.' And, taking up the lamp, he opened the door and went in.
A cold current of air passed them, and the light shot up for a moment in a flame of murky orange.
He shuddered. "'Shut the door behind you,' he said as he placed the lamp on the table.
Hallward glanced around him with a puzzled expression. The room looked as if it had not
been lived in for years. A faded Flemish tapestry, a curtained picture, an old Italian casson,
and an almost empty bookcase—that was all that it seemed to contain, besides a chair and table.
As Dorian Gray was lighting a half-burned candle that was standing on the mantel shelf,
he saw that the whole place was covered with dust, and that the carpet was in holes. A mouse
round scuffling behind the wainscotting. There was a damp odour of mildew.
"'So you think that it is only God who sees the soul, Basil?'
Draw that curtain back, and you will see mine."
The voice that spoke was cold and cruel.
"'You are mad, Dorian, or playing a part,' muttered Hallward, frowning.
"'You won't?'
"'Then I must do it myself,' said the young man, and he tore the curtain from its rod
and flung it on the ground. An exclamation of horror broke from Hallward's lips as he
saw in the dim light the hideous thing on the canvas leering at him. There was something in
its expression that filled him with disgust and loathing. Good heavens, it was Dorian Gray's own
face that he was looking at. The horror, whatever it was, had not yet entirely marred that marvellous
beauty. There was still some gold in the thinning hair and some scarlet on the sensual lips.
The sodden eyes had kept something of the loveliness of their blue. The noble curves
had not yet passed entirely from chiselled nostrils and from plastic throat. Yes,
it was Dorian himself, but who had done it? He seemed to recognise his own brushwork,
and the frame was his own design. The idea was monstrous, yet he felt afraid.
He seized the lighted candle and held it to the picture.
In the left-hand corner was his own name, traced in long letters of bright vermilion.
It was some foul parody, some infamous, ignobled satire. He had never done that.
Still, it was his own picture. He knew it, and he felt as if his blood had changed from fire to
sluggish ice in a moment. His own picture! What did it mean? Why had it altered?
He turned and looked at Dorian with the eyes of a sick man.
His mouth twitched, and his parched tongue seemed unable to articulate. He passed his
hand across his forehead. It was dank with clammy sweat. The young man was leaning against the
mantel-shelf, watching him with that strange expression that is on the faces of those who
are absorbed in a play when a great artist is acting. There was neither real sorrow in it,
nor real joy. There was simply the passion of the spectator, with perhaps a flicker of triumph in
the eyes. He had taken the flower out of his coat and was smelling it, or pretending to do so.
What does this mean? cried Hallward, at last. His own voice sounded shrill and curious in his ears.
"'Years ago, when I was a boy,' said Dorian Gray,
"'you met me, devoted yourself to me, flattered me, and taught me to be vain of my good looks.
One day you introduced me to a friend of yours, who explained to me the wonder of youth, and
you finished a portrait of me that revealed to me the wonder of beauty. In a mad moment,
that I don't know even now whether I regret or not, I made a wish. Perhaps you would call it
prayer.' I remember it. Oh, how well I remember it. No, the thing is impossible. The room is damp.
The mildew has gotten into the canvas. The paints I had used had some wretched mineral poison in them.
I tell you, the thing is impossible.'
"'What is impossible?' murmured the young man, going over to the window and leaning his forehead
against the cold, mist-stained glass.
"'You told me you destroyed it. I was wrong. It has destroyed me. I don't believe it is my picture.
Can't you see your romance in it?' said Dorian bitterly.
"'My romance, as you call it, as you called it. There was nothing evil in it, nothing shameful.
This is the face of a satyr. It is the face of my soul. God, what a thing I must have worshipped.
This has the eyes of a devil. Each of this has heaven and hell in him, Basil,'
cried Dorian with a gesture of despair.
Hallward turned again to the portrait and gazed at it.
"'My God, if it is true,' he exclaimed,
"'and this is what you have done with your life. Why, you must be worse even than those who talk
against you fancy you to be.' He held the light up again to the canvas and examined it. The surface
seemed to be quite undisturbed, and as he had left it, it was from within, apparently,
that the foulness and horror had come. Through some strange quickening of inner life the
leprosies of sin were slowly eating the thing away. The rotting of a corpse in a watery grave
was not so fearful. His hand shook, and the candle fell from its socket on the floor and
sputtering. He placed his foot on it and put it out. Then he flung himself into the rickety
chair that was standing by the table and buried his face in his hands.
Good God, Dorian, what an awful lesson!'
There was no answer, but he could hear the young man sobbing at the window.
"'Pray, Dorian, pray,' he murmured. What is it that one taught to say in one's boyhood?
Lead us not into temptation, forgive us our sins, wash away our inequities. Let us say that
together. The prayers of your pride has been answered. The prayer of your repentance will
be answered also. I worshiped you too much. I am punished for it. You worshiped yourself too much.
We are both punished.' Dorian Gray turned slowly around and looked at him with tear-dimmed eyes.
"'It is too late, Basil,' he murmured.
"'It is never too late, Dorian. Let us kneel down and try, if we can remember a prayer.
Isn't there a verse somewhere, though our sins be a scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow?'
Those words mean nothing to me now. Hush, don't say that. You've done enough evil in your life.
My God, don't you see that accursed thing leering at us?' Dorian Gray glanced at the picture, and
an uncontrollable feeling of hatred for Basil Hallward came over him. The mad passions of a
hunted animal stirred within him, and he loathed the man who was seated at the table more than he
had ever loathed anything in his whole life. He glanced wildly around. Something glimmered
on the top of the painted chest that faced him. His eye fell on it. He knew what it was.
It was a knife that he had brought up some days before to cut a piece of cord,
and had forgotten to take it away with him. He moved slowly towards it, passing Hallward as he
did so. As soon as he got behind him, he seized it and turned round. Hallward moved in his chair
as if he was going to rise. He rushed at him and dug the knife into the great vein that is behind
the ear, crushing the man's head down to the table and stabbing again and again. There was a stifled
groan, and the horrible sound of someone choking with blood. The outstretched arm shut up convulsively
three times, waving grotesque stiff-fingered hands in the air. He stabbed it once more,
but the man did not move. Something began to trickle on the floor. He waited for a moment,
still pressing the head down. Then he threw the knife on the table and listened.
He could hear nothing but the drip-drip on the threadbare carpet.
He opened the door and went out onto the landing. The house was quite quiet. No one was stirring.
He took out the key and returned to the room, locking himself in as he did so.
The thing was still seated in the chair, straining over the table with bowed head,
and humped back in long fantastic arms. Had it not been for the red jagged tear in the neck and
clotted black pool that slowly widened on the table, one would have said that the man was simply
asleep. How quickly had it all been done! He felt strangely calm and, walking over to the window,
opened it and stepped out onto the balcony. The wind had blown the fog away and the sky was like
monstrous peacock's tail, starred with myriads of golden eyes. He looked down and saw the policeman
going his rounds and flashing a bull's-eye lantern on the doors of the silent houses.
The crimson spot of a prowling handsome gleamed at the corner and then vanished. A woman in a
ragged shawl was creeping around by the railing, staggering as she went. Now and then she stopped
and peered back. Once again she began to sing in a hoarse voice. The policeman strolled over
and said something to her as she stumbled away laughing. A bitter blast swept across the square.
The gas lamps flickered and became blue, and the leafless trees shook their black iron branches
as if in pain. He shivered and went back, closing the window behind him. He passed to the door,
turned the key, and opened it. He did not even glance at the murdered man. He felt that the
secret of the whole thing was not to realize the situation. The friend who had painted the fatal
portrait, the portrait to which all his misery had been due, had gone out of his life. That was
enough. Then he remembered the lamp. It was a rather curious one of Moorish
workmanship made of dull silver inlaid with arabesques of burnished steel. Perhaps it might
be missed by a servant and questions would be asked. He turned back and took it from the table.
Still the man was. How horribly white the long hands looked. He was like a dreadful wax image.
He locked the door behind him and crept quietly downstairs. The woodwork creaked and seemed to
fly out as if in pain. He stopped several times and waited. No, everything was still.
It was merely the sound of his own footsteps.
When he reached the library he saw the bag and coat in the corner. They must be hidden away
somewhere. He unlocked a secret press that was in the wainscotting and put them into it.
He could easily burn them afterwards. Then he pulled out his watch. It was twenty minutes to two.
He sat down and began to think. Every year, every month almost, men were strangled in England for
what he had done. There had been a madness of murder in the air. Some red star had come too
close to the earth. Evidence? What evidence was there against him? Basil Hallward had left the
house at eleven. No one had seen him come in again. Most of the servants were at Selby Royal.
His valet had gone to bed. Paris? Yes, it was to Paris that Basil had gone by the midnight train,
as he had intended. With his curious reserved habits it would be months before any suspicions
would be aroused. Months. Everything could be destroyed long before then. A sudden thought
struck him. He put on his fur coat and hat and went out into the hall. There he paused, hearing
the slow heavy tread of the policeman outside on the pavement and seeing the flash of the lantern
reflected in the window. He waited, holding his breath. After a few moments he opened the front
door and slipped out, shutting it very gently behind him. Then he began ringing the bell.
It was about ten minutes, his valet appeared, half-dressed and looking very drowsy.
I am sorry to have had to wake you up, Francis, he said, stepping in.
But I had forgotten my latchkey. What time is it?
Five minutes past two, sir, answered the man, looking at the clock and yawning.
Five minutes past two! How horribly late! You must wake me up at nine tomorrow. I have some work to do.
All right, sir. Did anyone call this evening? Mr. Hallward, sir, he stayed here till eleven.
Then he went away to catch his train. Oh, I am sorry I didn't see him. Did he leave any message?
No, sir, except that he would write to you.
That will do, Francis. Don't forget to call me at nine tomorrow.
No, sir, the man shabbled down the passage in his slippers.
Dorian Gray threw his hat and coat upon the yellow marble table and passed into the library.
He walked up and down the room for a quarter of an hour, biting his lip and thinking.
Then he took the blue book down from one of the shelves and began to turn over the leaves.
Alan Campbell, 152 Hurtford Street, Mayfair. Yes, that was the man he wanted.
End of chapter 11